In this lecture, you'll see how to configure that PAT, Port Address Translation with a lab demo.
The scenario here is that we've cleared out all of the old NAT config from the previous lectures.
Going with a new scenario here.
So this is a small office.
We don't have any internal servers that they need to configure static NAT for.
They don't have a pool of public IP addresses.
They're just getting their public IP address on their outside fa0/0 interface from DHCP.
And that's not guaranteed to stay the same.
The service provider could change it at any time.
So because of that, we want our hosts from the inside to be able to get out to the outside.
So we're going to need to configure NAT for that.
And we're going to NAT them to whatever happens to be the IP address on the outside interface right
now.
We also need to configure overload as well because we've got multiple hosts on the inside.
We want them all to be able to share that same outside IP address.
So let's configure this.
So I will go on to my router, which is R1.
And let's have a look and see what the IP address is right now.
So do a show ip interface brief.
And you can see on my outside interface, it is using DHCP.
And currently it's using IP address 203.0.113.13.
But like I said, we don't want to use the IP address in our configuration because it might change.
We're going to use the interface instead, which is fa0/0.
So first things to do are to configure our NAT interfaces as usual.
So I'll go to global config and interface fa0/0
is IP NAT outside and interface fa2/0
is where my inside hosts are.
So that's IP NAT inside.
Next thing I need to do is to configure my NAT rule and my access list. So specify the host on the
inside. I'll say access-list 1 permit, they're on subnet 10.0.2.0 with a wildcard of
0.0.0.255.
And then my NAT rule, I say ip nat inside source list 1 meaning I'm referencing access-list 1 that
I just configured.
And rather than mapping this through a pool, I can't do that.
I haven't configured a pool.
I'm going to map it to the interface, interface fa0/0. And I could hit enter here but then that
would be just my standard Dynamic NAT without overload. So that's only one host on the inside would be able
to get out.
So I need to also remember to put in the overload
keyword to enable PAT. The router is now going to map the NAT translation's by IP address and port
number as well.
And it's going to track those so that when traffic comes back, it knows which host to send it back
to.
So that's the whole configuration.
We just need to check it now.
So let's do a debug so we can watch what's happening. So I'll do a debug ip nat and then I'll go
on to a host on the inside. Check
that traffic can get out.
I'll telnet 203.0.113.20.
Let's have a look back at the network diagram again.
So that's the host on the outside. 203.0.113.20,
that's a web server on the outside.
I've already set that up and it's going to accept incoming connections on port 80.
I need to check that may NAT rule is actually working, so I'll go on to PC1 and I'll telnet to it
on port 80 and
that's open.
So that looks good.
And if I look know on R1 because I enabled my debug,
I can see that the traffic came from 10.0.2.10. That is PC1 and it was NAT'd to the IP address
of 203.0.113.13.
That's my public IP address on the outside that was learned through DHCP.
And I can see the source port that was used originally from the host
was 53386.
And that was NAT'd to a source port number of 4096.
And it's going out to 203.0.113.20 on destination port 80.
So that all looks good.
Let's also send traffic out from PC2. So I'll also telnet out from here to
203.0.113.20 on port 80.
And if I look back on my router again, I can see that it came from PC2 10.0.2.11 and it's going
out to 203.0.113.20.
The source IP address was NAT'd to 203.0.113.13.
So I'm reusing that same single public IP address that I've got.
And this one, the original source port from the host was 11561, and that was translated
to 4097.
So it's going to be able to track return traffic based on IP address on port number.
It's all going to be going back to the same IP address, but it's going to be going back to different
port numbers.
If I do a show ip nat translations, I can see that the return traffic is all going to be coming back
to 203.0.113.13.
But when it's going to port 4096, the router knows to send that to 10.0.2.10. When it's going to port 4097,
the router knows to send that to 10.0.2.11.
OK, so that was it.
That was the entire NAT configuration. You've seen how to
verify it as well for Static NAT, Dynamic NAT and PAT as well.
So that was done with NAT.
See you in the next section.